Split Chrome and Chromium into separate products (#32485)
web-platform-tests/wpt: docs/running-tests/chrome-chromium-installation-detection.md

# Installation and Detection Protocol of Browser Binaries and Webdrivers for Chrome and Chromium

This is a detailed description of the process in which `wpt` detects
and installs the browser components for Chrome and Chromium.
This process can seem convoluted and difficult to understand at first glance,
but the reason for this process is to best ensure these components are
compatible with each other and are the intended items that the user
is trying to test.
## Chrome

### Detection

> - **Browser Binary**

Reviewer: Let's drop the bullet lists. The bolded text already makes the structure clear, and notes in the middle of the second bullet list don't work.

```suggestion
**Browser**
```

: Because `wpt` does not offer installation of Chrome browser binaries,
it will not attempt to detect a Chrome browser binary in the virtual environment
directory. Instead, `wpt` attempts to check commonly-used installation locations on
various operating systems. This detection process is only used if the user has not passed
a binary path as an argument using the `--binary` flag.

- **Webdriver**
: ChromeDriver detection for Chrome will only occur if a valid browser binary

> has been found and the version for that binary is discernible. Once the browser

Author: In this context, it meant that we were able to successfully check the version of the binary. Of course, a "valid browser binary" means that we can do this, and so this statement is redundant. I am removing it to avoid confusion.

binary version is detected, the virtual environment directory will be checked to see

> if a matching ChromeDriver version is already installed. If the browser and ChromeDriver

Author: Added clarification about version matching to the docs for Chrome and Chromium 👌

> versions do not match, the ChromeDriver file will be removed from the directory and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
versions do not match, the ChromeDriver binary will be removed from the directory and
```

the user will be prompted to begin the webdriver installation process.

Note: Both Chrome and Chromium’s versions of ChromeDriver are stored in separate
directories in the virtual environment directory i.e
`_venv3/bin/{chrome|chromium}/{chromedriver}`. This safeguards `wpt` from accidentally
using Chromium’s ChromeDriver for a Chrome run and vice versa. Additionally, there
is no need to reinstall ChromeDriver versions if switching between testing Chrome and Chromium.

### Installation

> - **Browser Binary**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Browser**
```

: Browser binary installation is not provided through `wpt` and will throw a
NotImplementedError if attempted via the install command. The user will need to
have a browser binary on their system that can be detected or provide a path explicitly
using the `--binary` flag.

- **Webdriver**
: A version of ChromeDriver will only be installed once a Chrome browser binary
has been given or detected. A FileNotFoundError will be raised if the user tries
to download ChromeDriver via the install command and a browser binary is not located.

> `wpt` will install a version of ChromeDriver that version-matches the browser binary.

Author: I changed the use of `wpt` in a lot of places here, as I meant to reference the application as a whole. In all of these places, I changed to "WPT" or reworded it entirely.

The download source for this ChromeDriver is
[described here](http://chromedriver.chromium.org/downloads/version-selection).
If a matching ChromeDriver version cannot be found using this process, it is assumed that
the Chrome browser binary is a dev version which does not have a ChromeDriver version available
through official releases. In this case, the Chromium revision associated with this version is
detected from the [OmahaProxy API](https://omahaproxy.appspot.com/) and used to download
Chromium's version of ChromeDriver for use, as this is currently the closest version we can

> match for Chrome Dev. If the version does not match any revision number, the latest revision

Author: Yes. I added that to the docs in this paragraph

of Chromium's ChromeDriver is installed.

## Chromium

> ### Detection
> - **Browser Binary**
> : Chromium browser binary detection is only executed on the virtual environment directory
> `_venv3/browsers/{channel}/`. Chromium’s implementation will not attempt to detect a Chromium
> browser binary on the user’s system outside of this directory. This detection process is only
> used if the user has not passed a binary path as an argument using the `--binary` flag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Detection

**Browser**: Chromium browser binary detection is only done in the virtual
environment directory `_venv3/browsers/{channel}/`, not on the user’s system
outside of this directory. This detection process is only used if the user has
not passed a binary path as an argument using the `--binary` flag.
```

- **Webdriver**
: ChromeDriver detection for Chromium will only occur if a valid browser binary has

> been found and the version for that binary is discernible. Once the browser binary version

Reviewer: Same question about "discernible" here.

is detected, the virtual environment directory will be checked to see if a matching ChromeDriver

> version is already installed. If the versions do not match, the ChromeDriver file will be removed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
version is already installed. If the versions do not match, the ChromeDriver binary will be removed
```

from the directory and the user will be prompted to begin the webdriver installation process.

### Installation
- **Browser Binary**
: Chromium’s browser binary will be installed from
[Chromium snapshots storage](https://storage.googleapis.com/chromium-browser-snapshots/index.html).
The last revision associated with the user’s operating system will be downloaded
(this revision is obtained by the LAST_CHANGE designation from the snapshots API).
Chromium does not have varying channels, so the installation uses the default `nightly`
designation. The install path is `_venv3/browsers/nightly/{chromium_binary}`.

> **Important Note**: If this download process is successful, the Chromium snapshot url

Reviewer: For consistency with the previous note, which seems about as important :)

```suggestion
Note: If this download process is successful, the Chromium snapshot URL
```

Chrome Dev.

Note: Both Chrome and Chromium’s versions of ChromeDriver are stored in separate
directories in the virtual environment directory i.e
`_venv3/bin/{chrome|chromium}/{chromedriver}`. This safeguards from accidentally
using Chromium’s ChromeDriver for a Chrome run and vice versa. Additionally, there
is no need to reinstall ChromeDriver versions if switching between testing Chrome and Chromium.

### Installation
**Browser** : Browser binary installation is not provided through WPT and will throw a
`NotImplementedError` if attempted via `./wpt install`. The user will need to
have a browser binary on their system that can be detected or provide a path explicitly
using the `--binary` flag.

- **WebDriver** : A version of ChromeDriver will only be installed once a Chrome browser binary
has been given or detected. A `FileNotFoundError` will be raised if the user tries to download
ChromeDriver via `./wpt install` and a browser binary is not located. After browser binary
detection, a version of ChromeDriver that matches the browser binary will be installed.
The download source for this ChromeDriver is

> [described here](http://chromedriver.chromium.org/downloads/version-selection).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[described here](https://chromedriver.chromium.org/downloads/version-selection).
```
